So let me explain to you the dark,
dark days of writing React.
If I was on this website and
I wanted to do a modal, which by the way,
objectively models,
terrible user interface.
I do not like them.
Please stop using them.
Now that I've said that, I'm going to
show you how to do a modal in React.
In the dark, dark days of React,
it was really hard to do.
Cuz if I click adopt Luna here and
I want it to pop up,
are you sure you wanna adopt Luna?
For many reasons,
that dog is a jerk sometimes.
But if you wanna do some sort
of user confirmation there,
think about how you would
write that in React.
With a modal you typically want it
to be like the topmost element of
an application, right, so that the CSS
renders over everything, right?
So that it has kind of precedents there.
Well, how are we gonna do that in React,
right?
Just think about our tree here
if we look into the dev tools,
inspect, and we go to Components.
That's kind of a cool trick I
just showed you right there.
So I can just like right click
Inspect Element here, here on this
particular element, and then if I just
go directly to the component one here,
it'll actually take me
directly to that one.
So it's smarter to say you're highlighting
this in the normal explorer, you go to
the component once it's going to highlight
the same thing in the React tree.
Okay, so our carousel's all
the way down here, right?
How am I gonna render something
that's above the header?
It's deeply nested in here, right?
So, it gets really tricky
really quickly of how to render
something above something.
To give you a separate
example that's not a modal,
imagine that I have a component here.
And then maybe I have some sort of like
contextual navigation above here where I
show maybe the Adopt Luna button
up here in the navigation.
How do I render something
from in carousel or
in the details page to the navigation?
It's possible, right, we could just
have top level state in app.jsx, right?
And that we could just pass that into
details and we can pass it into header.
And then we have to pull all
of our state up into app.jsx,
which kind of sucks, right?
We want that state to
live in details because
all of that logic could live together and
that would be very nice, right?
So, that is how we used to have to do it
until something called portals came along.
Portals basically allowed you to render to
a different place from within a component,
right?
So, actually what we're gonna do here
is we're gonna go to our index.html and
we're gonna put another div right here,
and we're gonna call it id equals portal.
And we're gonna put nothing in there for
the moment.
But now we have this other place in
the DOM where we can render stuff into.
And we can do it from within some
deeply nested component, right?
And that ends up being
really useful sometimes.
Or I called it portal here, I think in
my notes I actually call it modal, so
we're gonna call it modal.
Whatever you wanna call it here, but for
the moment let's just call it modal.
Okay, then come in here and
make a new file, call it modal.jsx.
Okay, and here inside of modal.jsx,
I want you to import use effect and
use ref.
We're gonna use another hook
here called ref from React.
And we're going to import create
portal from react-dom.
Okay, make a function here,
call it modal it's gonna take in children.
Just like Our error boundary, this
is basically going to mostly seamlessly
pass children through if it has children,
and if it doesn't even have any children,
then it's not going to render itself,
Okay, we're going to use a ref here.
And we're gonna say use ref, and
by default it's just gonna be null.
A ref is basically I have
this piece of something and
I need that the same thing
back every single time, right?
So I'm going to create a div and
I wanna have the same div back every time.
Whereas if I'm creating the div
anew every single time,
I'm getting a different div
on every render, right?
And I'm going to render into that div,
which is going to be our modal.
So bear with me for a second,
I know that's a little abstract.
Gonna say, if I have no elRef
Dot current,then create one.
elRef.current equals
document.createElement div.
You can think of basically an elRef or
a ref as a container to give yourself
back the same thing every single time.
That is the point of a ref.
So here in this elRef.current it's always
going to be the same div that I create
here and
it's going to create this div once.
Cuz I want the same div on
every single rerender of this.
And now that I have this handle on
this div, I can attach it to the DOM,
I can detach it from the DOM, and
I'm always operating on the same div.
Okay, here now I'm gonna use a use effect.
I'm gonna say,
const modalRoot equals document.
Don't do that.
Document.getElementById modal.
That's the one that we just put
into our index.html, right?
ModalRoot.appendChild elRef.current,
and then And
then at the end of this we're going to.
We only want this to happen once, right?
We don't want it to keep appending
itself over and over again.
And then lastly here,
we're going to return createPortal.
I'm gonna wrap this in a div.
You might ask, why aren't we just
passing children directly through,
which you totally could, right?
I don't need to div here for technical
reasons, right, you can just say children.
But we are going to put
a div here around children,
because my CSS classes require it.
So it's purely for styling purposes,
not cuz we actually needed it.
And then we're gonna pass
it into elRef.current And
then down here at the bottom,
export default Modal.
Really close, you're mad about this
cuz you need an equal sign, okay.
We have one problem here and
it's on this line.
Whenever this is finished,
cuz I'm gonna render a modal,
do you wanna adopt this pet?
And then after it's done,
they click yes or no,
we need to get rid of the modal, right?
It needs to go away.
So we need some sort of
cleanup to happen afterwards.
If you're using a class component you
would use component will unmount, right,
cuz a component's about to exit the DOM,
you wanna run that method.
How do you do component will
unmount in a function component?
It's kinda weird shape of an API, but
what you do is in this effect here,
we're going to return a function that
modalRoot.removeChild elRef.current.
So whenever you return an effect or
basically return anything,
in fact, it will run this whenever
the component will unmount.
It's kind of weird, but
this is how you do component will unmount.
Anything that you return
in an effect will be run
after a component has been
unmounted from the DOM.
It's not has been, its will be, right,
it does it before it totally unmounts.
So here we are now removing the child at
the end of it, which is important to do
otherwise we're gonna get Infinite
divs just being left inside of this
This portal, this modal.
Does that make sense?
Cool.
So yeah, the reason I typically end up
doing something like this is either to
remove something from the DOM,
which we've done here.
To remove event listeners, if you're doing
some sort of external event listening,
you'd have to go in here and
you have to remove an event listener,
that would happen here.
If you're like stopping a timer, if you're
doing something like a set timeout or
a request animation frame or what's
the one I'm thinking of, set interval.
Yeah, set interval, right,
you would cancel the interval here.
Last thing I can kind of think of is, on
some rare unfortunate occasion you have to
have a React component wrapped
like a jQuery component.
Any sort of cleanup that you would have to
do there, that would happen here as well.
Those are kind of reasons why you would
end up doing something like this.
Cool.
So, any questions about what
we've done here in modal.jsx?
I purposely structured this little bit so
that it's easier to do
with TypeScript later.
It's like creating the modal root
in here and all that kind of stuff.
You absolutely could just create
this once outside here like this.
That absolutely would work, but
it makes the TypeScript really ugly,
so I just do it inside of the modal root.
Cuz there's no reason to
do it here as well or
no reason not to do it here as well.
Okay, awesome.
Yeah, another question
that one might ask here,
why don't I just have const elRef equals
useRef Like this.
Why don't I do it this way?
How many times iis modal gonna get
run by other kinds of function?
A lot, potentially.
Potentially, could be run a lot.
Now if I provide it here it's basically
just saying this is the default and
then after that you can ignore it, right?
The problem is,
even though I'm not using it over and
over again, this document.createElement
is still gonna get called and
it's just gonna throw away the result.
Anything that you say document dot
something, it's just slow by default, and
all DOM API's, you need to
question how fast is this, right?
So I'm typically not one for
performance things like that, right, but
in this particular case,
churning through arbitrarily created divs
that you're throwing away,
not a good use of your CPU time.
Whereas you can do something like this,
right?
>> Could you not replace
the document.getElementById modal with
a useRef for it as well?
>> Could you put a ref here and
have that reference the modal?
You could, there's just no
reason that you would need to,
cuz this use effect is
only gonna get run once.
So I don't need to keep
track of it between renders.
I just need it inside of the use effect,
and that's it.
The only reason why I do it here is cuz
I'm creating a div that eventually I'm
going to remove.
Why do we do it this way by the way?
We could totally just reuse the same
div over and over and over again.
We do it this way because in theory you
could have multiple modals going on,
in which case I have lots of questions for
you.
But this makes it a little bit
more reusable because it's a self
contained starts up and cleans itself
up kind of sort of situation here.
It's not totally reusable in that aspect
cuz we're always rendering into modal,
so it really isn't reusable.
But here the way you would solve that
is you would just have props.target or
something like that.
And then you would have a target in here.
Or yeah, just target.
And then you really could have multiple
modals, which good luck with your CSS.